TODO
* solarEngineering
	* ~~translate and test code~~
	* Beckenham
		* ~~Convert~~
		* ~~SCADA in~~
		* ~~Debug GLD running. Needed small manual edit to... transformer?~~
		* ~~Calibrate. Flatline on chart. The years are different SCADA versus what's in calibrate.py. I updated calibrate.py to do dynamic date choosing, and it works!~~
		* JSON bundled version.
	* Alberich
		* ~~Fix conversion. Issue was unsafe array access on transformer lists, and also missing secondary transformer data with unsafe access. The std data is a joke~~
		* ~~SCADA in--note we're using station level, and we have feeder readings if we need them~~
		* ~~Debug GLD running.~~
			* ~~First steps: needed to change substation transformer from 0 VA rating to 25000. Also change PT_phase and CT_phase on regulator to one phase (A) for BANK regulated transformers. Had to remove load object A and B = 0 loads when on C phase system. Still has phase problems. Had to take a non-sub transformer from 0 to 100 VA power_rating. Also had to replace all zero transformer impdeance j parts with nonzero values.~~
			* ~~Separate code to check all phases.~~
			* ~~Ask GLD team. Problem is center-tapped transformers have to connect to triplex nodes. Need to find/replace broken center_tapped ones. What does that involve? Replacing all the ones where XS is the phase.~~
			* ~~New error: some conductors are missing. Need to walk the tree again.~~
			* ~~New, new error: need to add back some center tap thingies.~~
			* ~~New, new, new, new error: more phases entering than leaving. Deleted one. Error comes back. Changed phasing on nodeOTx200720OHx19973 from ABC to AC.~~
			* ~~Another error: ERROR [2000-01-01 00:00:00 PST] : sync_node(obj=0;AUBREY 2): All nodes were not properly populated. GLD 3.1 says the problem is NODE150073. Deleted it and it works now.~~ 
		* Calibrate. Data in MW but we expected kW--fixed by multiplying SCADA * 1000.
		* JSON bundled version.
	* TreePond
		* ~~Windmil convert.~~
		* ~~SCADA in.~~
		* ~~Debug GLD Running. Have to replace zero reactances in impedance. Also needs to up some transformer ratings 10x (435666_A, 435666_C, 435666_B).~~
		* Calibrate. They've got 7 lines coming out of their sub! Quick hack to make it just 1.
		* JSON bundled version.
	* GLD shakedown test all.
	* Add weather?
	* Put into solarEngineering.
* solarFinancial (easy), Compare to PVSyst
* solarRates (easy...ish...).
* How do we deliver? Document plus files. Will the co-ops be cool with raw or anonymized data?


The key is to get caliCheckPlot working correctly for each of them...
Do we want to put them in folders right by this file? Yes.
How long does straight calibration take? With json creation it takes 200 seconds.
Okay, it doesn't matter if we break calibration for anything else. It's just got to work for these three feeders.

Can we get complex power out of the gld recorder? PLEASE SAY YES.

Power levels in SCADA are WAY OFF. 